PSMDB-2150-SBOM into PSMDB binary packages (#1148)
percona/psmdb-docs: docs/sbom.md

### Binary tarball

```bash
# Confirm the SBOM is bundled
tar tzf percona-server-mongodb-{{release}}-x86_64.<operating-system>.tar.gz | grep percona-server-mongodb.sbom.cdx.json

# Extract and scan
tar xzf percona-server-mongodb-{{release}}-x86_64.<operating-system>.tar.gz \
    -C /tmp percona-server-mongodb/percona-server-mongodb.sbom.cdx.json
trivy sbom --severity HIGH,CRITICAL --ignore-unfixed \
    /tmp/percona-server-mongodb/percona-server-mongodb.sbom.cdx.json
```

### RPM package

```bash
# Confirm the package installs the SBOM
rpm -ql percona-server-mongodb-server | grep cdx.json

# Scan it (replace 9.x with your RHEL/OL version)
trivy sbom --severity HIGH,CRITICAL --ignore-unfixed --distro redhat/9.x \
    /usr/share/doc/percona-server-mongodb-server.sbom.cdx.json
```

### DEB package

```bash
# Confirm the package installs the SBOM
dpkg -L percona-server-mongodb-server | grep sbom.cdx.json

# Scan it
trivy sbom --severity HIGH,CRITICAL --ignore-unfixed \
    /usr/share/doc/percona-server-mongodb-server.sbom.cdx.json
```

### Docker images

> Each PSMDB Docker image (Docker Hub `percona/percona-server-mongodb-server`, PerconaLab `perconalab/percona-server-mongodb-server`) ships with **two** CycloneDX 1.6 SBOMs that describe overlapping scopes:

Author: Ignore.

| SBOM | Scope | How to access |
|---|---|---|
| **Embedded** | PSMDB packages only | Inside the image filesystem |
| **OCI-attached** | Full image — PSMDB and UBI9 base OS packages | Registry-side, via the OCI Referrers API |

#### Scan via OCI Referrers API (recommended)

`trivy image --sbom-sources oci` fetches the attached SBOM via the OCI Referrers API and scans it, without pulling the image:

```bash
trivy image --severity HIGH,CRITICAL --ignore-unfixed --sbom-sources oci \

>     docker.io/percona/percona-server-mongodb-server

Author: Ignore

# Software Bill of Materials

A Software Bill of Materials (SBOM) is a machine-readable inventory of the components and dependencies included in a software release. It helps you understand what is included in a build and assess potential security or compliance risks.

Starting with version 8.3, every Percona Server for MongoDB (PSMDB) release includes a [CycloneDX :octicons-link-external-16:](https://cyclonedx.org/specification/overview/){:target="_blank"} SBOM in JSON format.

## Why it matters

An SBOM helps you:

- Identify the components and dependencies included in a PSMDB release.
- Assess known vulnerabilities using SBOM-compatible security scanners.
- Support security reviews, compliance processes, and software supply chain requirements.
- Verify the contents of deployed software artifacts.

## Where to find the SBOM

| Distribution method | SBOM location |
|---|---|

> | Binary tarball | `doc/percona-server-mongodb/sbom.cdx.json` |

Reviewer: Just noticed a wrong SBOM path in tarball
```suggestion
| Binary tarball | `doc/sbom.cdx.json` |
```

```bash
# Confirm the package installs the SBOM
rpm -ql percona-server-mongodb-server | grep sbom.cdx.json

# Scan it (replace 9.x with your RHEL/OL version)
grype sbom:/usr/share/doc/percona-server-mongodb-server/sbom.cdx.json
```

### DEB package

```bash
# Confirm the package installs the SBOM
dpkg -L percona-server-mongodb-server | grep sbom.cdx.json

# Scan it
grype sbom:/usr/share/doc/percona-server-mongodb-server/sbom.cdx.json
```

### Docker images

Each PSMDB Docker image (Docker Hub `docker.io/percona/percona-server-mongodb-server, PerconaLab docker.io/perconalab/percona-server-mongodb-server`) ships with **two** CycloneDX SBOMs that describe overlapping scopes:

| SBOM | Scope |CyclonDX version |How to access |
|---|---|---|----|
| **Embedded** | PSMDB packages only | 1.5|Inside the image filesystem |
| **OCI-attached** | Full image — PSMDB and UBI9 base OS packages | 1.6|Registry-side, via the OCI Referrers API |

#### Scan via OCI Referrers API (recommended)

`trivy image --sbom-sources oci` fetches the attached SBOM via the OCI Referrers API and scans it, without pulling the image:

```bash
trivy image --severity HIGH,CRITICAL --ignore-unfixed --sbom-sources oci \

>     docker.io/percona/percona-server-mongodb-server

Reviewer: The Docker image does _not_ have `-server` in its name. Also, it can make sense to add a tag (including the CPU architecture) to the image reference so that example looks more complete. Finally, I suggest removing the `--ignore-unfixed` option since it can hide potential issues:
```suggestion
trivy image --severity HIGH,CRITICAL --sbom-sources oci \
    docker.io/percona/percona-server-mongodb:8.3.4-1-amd64
```

Author: The version has changed.

Reviewer: > The version has changed

This is probably a misunderstanding. Changed version does not resolve the issue by itself, since the issue wasn't the specific version. It was absence of any version at all, as well as incorrect Docker image name.

```suggestion
trivy image --severity HIGH,CRITICAL --sbom-sources oci \
    docker.io/percona/percona-server-mongodb:{{ release }}-amd64
```

```

#### Scan the embedded SBOM

To scan the embedded SBOM from inside the container image:

```bash
docker run --rm -it --entrypoint cat \
    docker.io/percona/percona-server-mongodb \
    /usr/share/doc/percona-server-mongodb/sbom.cdx.json \
    | grype --from sbom
```

#### Advanced: Inspect OCI-attached SBOMs with ORAS

You can use the [ORAS CLI :octicons-link-external-16:](https://oras.land/){:target="_blank"} to discover and download OCI-attached SBOMs.

```bash
# Use the per-architecture tag to resolve directly to the image manifest
oras discover --format tree \
    docker.io/percona/percona-server-mongodb-amd64

# Pull the SBOM artifact using the digest from the discover output
oras pull docker.io/percona/percona-server-mongodb@sha256:<referrer-digest>

> ```

Reviewer: I corrected the image reference and included the command output for more illustrative example:

`````suggestion
Use the per-architecture tag to resolve directly to the image manifest:
```bash
oras discover --format tree \
    docker.io/percona/percona-server-mongodb:8.3.4-1-amd64
```
Example output:
```
docker.io/percona/percona-server-mongodb@sha256:<some_fingerprint>
└── application/vnd.cyclonedx+json
    └── sha256:<another_fingerprint>
        └── [annotations]
            └── org.opencontainers.image.created: "2026-07-28T14:24:59Z"
```
Pull the SBOM artifact using the digest from the discover output and see the file locally:
```bash
oras pull docker.io/percona/percona-server-mongodb@sha256:<another_fingerprint>
ls 
```
Example output:
```
percona-server-mongodb-8.3.4-1-amd64.cdx.json
```
`````

- Support security reviews, compliance processes, and software supply chain requirements.
- Verify the contents of deployed software artifacts.

## Where to find the SBOM

| Distribution method | SBOM location |
|---|---|
| Binary tarball | `doc/sbom.cdx.json` |
| RPM package | `/usr/share/doc/percona-server-mongodb-server/sbom.cdx.json` |
| DEB package | `/usr/share/doc/percona-server-mongodb-server/sbom.cdx.json` |
| Docker image | Embedded in the image and available as an attached OCI artifact. See [Docker images](#docker-images). |

## Verifying and scanning the SBOM

The examples below use [Grype :octicons-link-external-16:](https://github.com/anchore/grype){:target="_blank"}.

!!! note
    [Trivy :octicons-link-external-16:](https://trivy.dev/){:target="_blank"} cannot currently scan the SBOMs included with Percona Server for MongoDB DEB and RPM packages or binary tarballs. Most dependencies in these SBOMs are identified using the GitHub package type, which Trivy does not fully support in this context.

    Trivy can, however, scan the SBOMs associated with Percona Server for MongoDB Docker images.

### Binary tarball

```bash
# Confirm the SBOM is bundled

> tar tzf percona-server-mongodb-{{tag}}-x86_64.<operating-system>.tar.gz | grep doc/percona-server-mongodb/sbom.cdx.json

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tar tzf percona-server-mongodb-<version>-x86_64.<os_codename>.tar.gz \
    | grep doc/sbom.cdx.json
```

# Extract and scan
tar xzf percona-server-mongodb-{{tag}}-x86_64.<operating-system>.tar.gz \
    -C /tmp doc/percona-server-mongodb/sbom.cdx.json

> grype sbom:/tmp/doc/percona-server-mongodb/sbom.cdx.json

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tar xzf percona-server-mongodb-<verson>-x86_64.<os_codename>.tar.gz \
    -C /tmp percona-server-mongodb-<version>-x86_64.<os_codename>/doc/sbom.cdx.json
grype sbom:/tmp/percona-server-mongodb-<version>-x86_64.<os_codename>/doc/sbom.cdx.json
```

```

### RPM package

```bash
# Confirm the package installs the SBOM
rpm -ql percona-server-mongodb-server | grep sbom.cdx.json

# Scan it (replace 9.x with your RHEL/OL version)

> grype sbom:/usr/share/doc/percona-server-mongodb-server/sbom.cdx.json

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Scan it (replace `rhel:9.8` with your `<os_name>:<os_version>`)
grype --distro rhel:9.8 sbom:/usr/share/doc/percona-server-mongodb-server/sbom.cdx.json
```

```

### DEB package

```bash
# Confirm the package installs the SBOM
dpkg -L percona-server-mongodb-server | grep sbom.cdx.json

# Scan it

> grype sbom:/usr/share/doc/percona-server-mongodb-server/sbom.cdx.json

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Scan it (replace `ubuntu:24.04` with your `<os_name>:<os_version>`)
grype --distro ubuntu:24.04 sbom:/usr/share/doc/percona-server-mongodb-server/sbom.cdx.json
```

```

### Docker images

Each PSMDB Docker image (Docker Hub `docker.io/percona/percona-server-mongodb-server`, PerconaLab `docker.io/perconalab/percona-server-mongodb-server`) ships with **two** CycloneDX SBOMs that describe overlapping scopes:

| SBOM | Scope | CycloneDX version | How to access |
|---|---|---|---|
| **Embedded** | PSMDB packages only | 1.5 | Inside the image filesystem |
| **OCI-attached** | Full image — PSMDB and UBI9 base OS packages | 1.6 | Registry-side, via the OCI Referrers API |

#### Scan via OCI Referrers API (recommended)

`trivy image --sbom-sources oci` fetches the attached SBOM via the OCI Referrers API and scans it, without pulling the image:

```bash
trivy image --severity HIGH,CRITICAL --ignore-unfixed --sbom-sources oci \
    docker.io/percona/percona-server-mongodb-server
```

#### Scan the embedded SBOM

> To scan the embedded SBOM from inside the container image: {{ tag }}-amd64

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To scan the embedded SBOM from inside the container image: <version>-amd64
```

```bash

> docker run --rm -it --entrypoint cat \
>     docker.io/percona/percona-server-mongodb \
>     /usr/share/doc/percona-server-mongodb/sbom.cdx.json \
>     | grype --from sbom

Reviewer: ```suggestion
docker run --rm -it --entrypoint cat \
    docker.io/percona/percona-server-mongodb:<version>-amd64 \
    /usr/share/doc/percona-server-mongodb-server/sbom.cdx.json \
    | grype --from sbom
```

```

#### Advanced: Inspect OCI-attached SBOMs with ORAS

You can use the [ORAS CLI :octicons-link-external-16:](https://oras.land/){:target="_blank"} to discover and download OCI-attached SBOMs.

Use the per-architecture tag to resolve directly to the image manifest:
```bash
oras discover --format tree \

>     docker.io/percona/percona-server-mongodb:{{ tag }}-amd64

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    docker.io/percona/percona-server-mongodb:<version>-amd64
```

```
Example output:
```
docker.io/percona/percona-server-mongodb@sha256:<some_fingerprint>
└── application/vnd.cyclonedx+json
    └── sha256:<another_fingerprint>
        └── [annotations]
            └── org.opencontainers.image.created: "2026-07-28T14:24:59Z"
```
Pull the SBOM artifact using the digest from the discover output and see the file locally:
```bash
oras pull docker.io/percona/percona-server-mongodb@sha256:<another_fingerprint>

> ls 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ls
```

```
Example output:
```

> percona-server-mongodb-{{ tag }}-amd64.cdx.json

Reviewer: ```suggestion
percona-server-mongodb-<version>-amd64.cdx.json
```

An SBOM helps you:

- Identify the components and dependencies included in a PSMDB release.
- Assess known vulnerabilities using SBOM-compatible security scanners.
- Support security reviews, compliance processes, and software supply chain requirements.
- Verify the contents of deployed software artifacts.

## Where to find the SBOM

| Distribution method | SBOM location |
|---|---|
| Binary tarball | `doc/sbom.cdx.json` |
| RPM package | `/usr/share/doc/percona-server-mongodb-server/sbom.cdx.json` |
| DEB package | `/usr/share/doc/percona-server-mongodb-server/sbom.cdx.json` |
| Docker image | Embedded in the image and available as an attached OCI artifact. See [Docker images](#docker-images). |

## Verifying and scanning the SBOM

The examples below use [Grype :octicons-link-external-16:](https://github.com/anchore/grype){:target="_blank"}.

!!! note
    [Trivy :octicons-link-external-16:](https://trivy.dev/){:target="_blank"} cannot currently scan the SBOMs included with Percona Server for MongoDB DEB and RPM packages or binary tarballs. Most dependencies in these SBOMs are identified using the GitHub package type, which Trivy does not fully support in this context.

>     Trivy can, however, scan the SBOMs associated with Percona Server for MongoDB Docker images.

Reviewer: I was not clear enough earlier. Trivy won't scan the SBOM embedded into a Docker image because it is the same as the one in RPM package. Trivy scans only the one that is "attached OCI artifact". I suggest a change to underline that.
```suggestion
    Trivy can, however, scan the SBOMs attached to Percona Server for MongoDB Docker images as OCI artifacts.
```

### Binary tarball

```bash
# Confirm the SBOM is bundled

> tar tzf percona-server-mongodb-<version>-x86_64.<os_codename>.tar.gz \

Reviewer: Do we also need to use release here?
```suggestion
tar tzf percona-server-mongodb-{{ release }}-x86_64.<os_codename>.tar.gz \
```

```

### Docker images

Each PSMDB Docker image (Docker Hub `docker.io/percona/percona-server-mongodb-server`, PerconaLab `docker.io/perconalab/percona-server-mongodb-server`) ships with **two** CycloneDX SBOMs that describe overlapping scopes:

| SBOM | Scope | CycloneDX version | How to access |
|---|---|---|---|
| **Embedded** | PSMDB packages only | 1.5 | Inside the image filesystem |
| **OCI-attached** | Full image — PSMDB and UBI9 base OS packages | 1.6 | Registry-side, via the OCI Referrers API |

#### Scan via OCI Referrers API (recommended)

`trivy image --sbom-sources oci` fetches the attached SBOM via the OCI Referrers API and scans it, without pulling the image:

```bash
trivy image --severity HIGH,CRITICAL --ignore-unfixed --sbom-sources oci \
    docker.io/percona/percona-server-mongodb-server
```

#### Scan the embedded SBOM

To scan the embedded SBOM from inside the container image: {{ release }}-amd64

```bash
docker run --rm -it --entrypoint cat \
    docker.io/percona/percona-server-mongodb:{{ release }}-amd64 \
    /usr/share/doc/percona-server-mongodb-server/sbom.cdx.json \
    | grype --from sbom
```

> #### Advanced: Inspect OCI-attached SBOMs with ORAS

Reviewer: Despite some minor things that need to be fixed, I really like how you reformatted the "Inspect OCI-attached SBOMs with ORAS" section. It is much easier to follow now.
Nothing to fix regarding this comment. Feel free to resolve it.

You can use the [ORAS CLI :octicons-link-external-16:](https://oras.land/){:target="_blank"} to discover and download OCI-attached SBOMs.

Follow these steps:
{.power-number}

1. Use the per-architecture tag to resolve directly to the image manifest:

    ```bash
    oras discover --format tree \
        docker.io/percona/percona-server-mongodb:{{ release }}-amd64
    ```

    ??? example "Output"

        ```text
        docker.io/percona/percona-server-mongodb@sha256:<image_manifest_digest>
        └── application/vnd.cyclonedx+json
            └── sha256:<sbom_artifact_digest>
                └── [annotations]
                    └── org.opencontainers.image.created: "2026-07-28T14:24:59Z"
        ```

        The `<image_manifest_digest>` identifies the container image. The `<sbom_artifact_digest>` identifies the CycloneDX SBOM artifact attached to that image.

2. Copy the SBOM artifact digest from the output and use it to download the SBOM to the current directory. Replace `SBOM_ARTIFACT_DIGEST` with the value displayed after `sha256:`:

    ```bash
    oras pull docker.io/percona/percona-server-mongodb@sha256:SBOM_ARTIFACT_DIGEST

>     ```

Reviewer: We already have the `<sbom_artifact_digest>` placeholder. In my opinion, it will confuse a reader if we introduce the other identifier `SBOM_ARTIFACT_DIGEST` that has the exactly the same meaning as `<sbom_artifact_digest>`. Moreover, `SBOM_ARTIFACT_DIGEST` has further confusion potential because it doesn't follow the typical convention for placeholders, which is using lowercase names in the angle brackets. 

Using `<sbom_artifact_digest>` both in example output above and the `oras pull` command example underlines the fact that it is the very same value that goes from the example output to the `oral pull`.

Does it make sense?

```suggestion
2. Copy the SBOM artifact digest from the output and use it to download the SBOM to the current directory. Replace `<sbom_artifact_digest>` with the value displayed after `sha256:`:

    ```bash
    oras pull docker.io/percona/percona-server-mongodb@sha256:<sbom_artifact_digest>
    ```
```
